Project cleanup and documentation (#127)
smartuni/riot-po-2026: README.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Welcome to the primary repository of the RIOT im Internet of Things project for the Summer 2026 semester at HAW Hamburg. The project is concerned with designing, implementing and presenting technologies to improve the city of Hamburg's methods of managing its harbor's floodgates.
```

Update year and have the goal still be the goal.

# RIOT im Internet of Things, Sommersemester 2026

## Project Introduction

Welcome to the primary repository of the RIOT im Internet of Things project for the Summer 2026 semester at HAW Hamburg. The project is concerned with designing, implementing and presenting technologies to improve the city of Hamburg's methods of managing its harbor's floodgates.

## The Current Situation

Field workers use walkie-talkies to report floodgate status. Central office logs everything on paper. This is slow, error-prone, and creates no digital trail — a critical risk during floods.

> ### Propesed Solution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Proposed Solution
```

```

Build the firmware using 
```bash
make all -j
```
>Note: when building for the first time, the entire build toolchain will be set up in the docker container automatically. This will take some time and download several GB of data. Make sure to have at least 20 GB of storage available for this.

#### Flashing firmware

To flash, make sure to install the following python dependencies using `pip install` (ideally in the uv venv set up ealier):
- pyserial
- psutil

Make sure that the user account doing the flashing has the necessary permission, e.g. being in the `dialout` group on linux or similar for other operating systems.

Flash the previously built firmware using
```bash
make flash
```

If no identity is provisioned on the external flash (like after inital flashing of a new board), the screen of a senseMate will stay blank after successfully flashing and no (or not much) log output will appear.

#### Provisioning devices

Provisioning of devices is done via the identity-manager module found at `/nodes/firmware/identity-manager/`

> Note: uv must be installed to run the identity manager.

##### Setup

To use the credential manager, it needs to be set up.

> First, create the config for the credential manager at `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/config.yaml`. See the example config (`config.examle.yaml`) for reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, create the config for the credential manager at `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/config.yaml`. See the example config (`config.example.yaml`) for reference.
```

| Document | What You'll Find |
|----------|------------------|
| [SenseGate Firmware](./documentation/Firmware/SenseGate/README.md) | Sensor logic, gate observer state machine, LoRaWAN uplink, COSE/CBOR data flow |
| [SenseMate Firmware](./documentation/Firmware/SenseMate/README.md) | LVGL OLED UI, BLE communication, sound/vibration subsystems, HLC timestamps |
| [SenseGate Hardware](./documentation/Hardware/SenseGate/README.md) | PCB components, pin mapping table with firmware references, RIOT board hierarchy |
| [SenseMate Hardware](./documentation/Hardware/SenseMate/README.md) | PCB v2 components, 28-pin XIAO mapping, LoRa/display/buzzer pinout |
| [Backend](./documentation/Backend/README.md) | REST API endpoints (Auth, Gates, Nodes, Notifications), JPA entities, Flyway migrations, MQTT/WebSocket setup |
| [Frontend](./documentation/Frontend/README.md) | React 19 + Redux Toolkit architecture, feature-based structure, STOMP WebSocket middleware, auth flow |

### External References

| Resource | Purpose |
|----------|---------|
| [Identity Manager](./nodes/firmware/identity-manager/README.md) | Python tool for provisioning node identities and LoRaWAN credentials |

> | [Key Distribution](./nodes/firmware/custom-modules/key-distro/README.md) | Cryptographic key generation for COSE signing |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 2: The key-distro module was removed and its functionality is already fully covered by the Identity Manager ref on line 306 (that documents the same key generation workflow)

## Our Proposed Solution

The solution proposed and developed by our team is as follows: 

> - Floodgates will be fitted with sensors, called "GateMates," which autonomously report the state of the gate (open or closed) to a server located in the central office.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Floodgates will be fitted with sensors, called "senseGates", which autonomously report the state of a gate (open or closed) to a server located in the central office.
```

We call it senseGate now.

> - Field workers will be issued devices, called "SenseMates," which receive orders from the central office. SenseMates will also record the state of nearby gates by communicating with the GateMates, enabling workers to confirm or refute the state reported by the GateMate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Field workers will be issued devices, called "senseMates," which receive orders from the central office. senseMates will also record the state of nearby gates by communicating with the senseGates, enabling workers to confirm or refute the state reported by the senseGates.
```

Capitalization, spelling and also GateMate -> senseGate.

- The workers at the office will be given a web app with a user interface, allowing them to track the status of gates in real time, as well as providing a digital record of the status of gates and allowing them to issue orders without the need for walkie-talkie communication.

Our proposed solution replaces the inefficient methods currently used by the city of Hamburg with fast and reliable digital methods, saving crucial time in the event of a flood.

## How to start the project

### Nodes

#### Build prerequisities

First, make sure that the riot submodule is downloaded:
```bash
git submodule init
git submodule update
```

To build the firmware, flash, and provision the nodes, the following tools need to be installed
```
make
docker
uv
```

To use a python venv, run the following commands in the root directory of the project:
```bash
uv venv --seed
source .venv/bin/activate
```

> Note: some linux distributions no longer allow installing python packages via pip directly. It is recommended to use a venv instead for easier package management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: some Linux distributions no longer allow installing python packages via pip directly. It is recommended to use a venv instead for easier package management.
```

Have the note be a quote, matching style of how those are often done.  
Also capitalize Linux.

#### Building firmware

Navigate to the respective folders for senseMate or senseGate in `nodes/firmware/applications/sense{Mate|Gate}`

> If the target device is not the current (v2) hardware revision, make sure to set the `BOARD=` variable in the respective Makefile correctly. The value for the older v1 boards should be nearby but commented out in the Makefile.

Reviewer: Let's instead put something after the make command like this:
```
> Note: To build the firmware for the previous (v1) hardware revision, instead run:
> ```
> BOARD=adafruit-feather-nrf52840-sense make all -j
> ```
```

Set environment variable to use the docker build stack:
```bash
export BUILD_IN_DOCKER=1
```

Build the firmware using 
```bash
make all -j
```

> Note: when building for the first time, the entire build toolchain will be set up in the docker container automatically. This will take some time and download several GB of data. Make sure to have at least 20 GB of storage available for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: when building for the first time, the entire build toolchain will be set up in the docker container automatically. This will take some time and download several GB of data. Make sure to have at least 20 GB of storage available for this.
```

Have the note be a quote, matching style of how those are often done.

#### Flashing firmware

To flash, make sure to install the following python dependencies using `pip install` (ideally in the uv venv set up ealier):
- pyserial
- psutil

> Make sure that the user account doing the flashing has the necessary permission, e.G. being in the `dialout` group on linux or similar for other operating systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that the user account doing the flashing has the necessary permission, e.g. being in the `dialout` group on linux or similar for other operating systems.
```

"e.g." small.

Flash the previously built firmware using
```bash
make flash
```

> If no identity key is provisioned on the external flash (like after inital flashing of a new board), the screen will stay blank after successfully flashing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no identity is provisioned on the external flash (like after initial flashing of a new board), the screen of a senseMate would stay blank after successfully flashing and no (or not much) log output would appear.
```
Spelling, specify that a senseMate is referred to with the screen and also provide another hint for when no identity is provisioned. Also just refer to it as "identity".

#### Provisioning devices

Provisioning of devices is done via the identity-manager module found at `/nodes/firmware/identity-manager/`

> The uv venv set up in previous step is required to use the identity manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: You must have uv installed to run the identity manager.
```

That's not true, `uv` must simply be available, so just put a note instead.

##### Setup

To use the credential manager, it needs to be set up.

> First, create the config for the credential manager at `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/config.yaml`. See the example config (`config.examle.yaml) for reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create the config for the credential manager at `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/config.yaml`. See the example config (`config.examle.yaml`) for reference.
```

Missing `.

> Now, log in to the [TTN Console](https://eu1.cloud.thethings.network) and navigate to Applications → your application → API keys, create a new api key, and put it into the config. Update your application ID if necessary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, log in to the [TTN Console](https://eu1.cloud.thethings.network) and navigate to Applications → your application → API keys, create a new API key, and put it into the config. Update your application ID if necessary. 
```

Capitalize API consistently.

> Next, either import an existing root key into `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/identities/root`, or create a new key using the identity manager as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, either import an existing root identity into `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/identities/root`, or create a new one using the identity manager as follows:
```
Refer to it as an identity.

```bash
./identity-manager.py root create
```

> Note: the same root key must be used for all nodes for them to be able to communicate with eachother successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: the same root identity must be used for all nodes for them to be able to communicate with each other successfully.
```
Have the note be a quote, matching style of how those are often done.  
Also refer to it as an identity, spelling.

> Next, individual nodes need to be configured. These can either be imported by putting their respective configurations into `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/identities/node/` or by creating them using the identity manager as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, individual node identities need to be configured. These can either be imported by putting their respective ID info files into `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/identities/node/` or by creating them using the identity manager as follows:
```

Specify we are talking about identities and their id info files.

```bash
./identity-manager.py node create [senseMate|senseGate] [-i 1]
```

> These commands creates a new configurations for either a senseMate or a senseGate with the ID 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command creates a new identity for either a senseMate or a senseGate with the ID 1.
```
Refer to it as an identity and don't use plural.

> The ID parameter (`-i [id]`) is optional and can be omitted, in that case the id just counts up from 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ID parameter (`-i [id]`) is optional and can be omitted, in that case the next free ID gets chosen counts up.
```

###### Provisioning

> When provisioning a node, it is best practice to wipe the external storage before just to make sure that it does not contain other data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When provisioning a node, it is best practice to wipe the node, so a subsequent flash is going to succeed without issues.
```
It's more that flashing a provisioned node makes trouble with the writing the payload over serial, not so much to clear the flash.

Author: I get your point but it sounds like we're wiping the firmware off again when we put it like this

> This is done by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is done by running:
```
Missing colon.

```bash
./identity-manager.py node wipe
```

> Now the node can be provisioned with the previously generated keys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the node can be provisioned with the previously generated identity:
```
Refer to it as an identity.

```bash
./identity-manager.py node provision [senseMate|senseGate] ID
```

> Warning: the wipe and provision commands try to communicate with the node via `/dev/ttyACM0`. Make sure to only have one node connected at a time to avoid confusion. If the communication fails, check if another device is already registered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Warning: The wipe and provision commands try to communicate with the node via `/dev/ttyACM0`. Make sure to only have one node connected at a time to avoid confusion. If the communication fails, check if another device is already registered.
```
Have the warning be a quote, matching style of the notes. Also capitalize after the colon.

> Note: once a node is provisioned, flashing a new firmware on it does not affect the keys as they are stored on the flash. This provisioning step only needs to be done once (unless the keys get deleted from the flash somehow).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Once a node is provisioned, flashing a new firmware on it does not affect the identity as it's stored on the flash. This provisioning step only needs to be done once (unless the identity gets deleted from the flash somehow).
```
Have the note be a quote, matching style of how those are often done.  
Also capitalize after the colon and refer to it as an identity.

> More info can be found in the README for the identity-manager module at `nodes/firmware/identity-manager/README.md`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More info can be found in the [README of the identity-manager module](nodes/firmware/identity-manager/README.md).
```

Just make this a link.

### Dashboard

Required dependencies

- docker

#### MQTT connection setup

to obtain MQTT credentials for the connection to the things network, log into the [TTN Console](https://eu1.cloud.thethings.network)

> Navigate to Applications → your application → other integrations → MQTT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to Applications → your application → other integrations → MQTT.
```
Missing dot.

Author: I will leave this out to avoid confusion about the name of the menu item

> Generate a new api key here, and insert the following into `server/backend/src/main/resources/application.yml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate a new API key here, and insert the following into `server/backend/src/main/resources/application.yml`:
```
Capitalize API consistently.

```
mqtt:
  broker: ssl://eu1.cloud.thethings.network:8883
  clientId: testing ← this does not matter
  username: hawriotfloodgates@ttn ← you find this on the mqtt page
  applicationId: hawriotfloodgates ← your application ID
  password: NNSXS.XXXXXXXXXX.XXXXXXX ← the API key goes here
  subscribeTopic: v3/hawriotfloodgates@ttn/devices/+/up  ← put the username in here
```

> Hint: when starting the backend container, look for the following lines in the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Hint: when starting the backend container, look for the following lines in the output:
```
Have hint be a quote, matching the style of notes.  
The following lines should then probably be quoted as well.

```
MQTT Publisher verbunden
MQTT-Client gestartet, warte auf Nachrichten...
```
If these don't appear, double check your configuration and make sure that the MQTT broker is reachable via the network. As of summer 2026, port 8883 is blocked in the HAW network, so use a VPN or mobile hotspot if necessary. 

#### Starting the Dashboard

Start the containers with `docker compose up`

> Note: when testing out new changes to the code, make sure to delete the built container images using `docker image rm <image>` before running them again to get the latest state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: when testing out new changes to the code, make sure to delete the built container images using `docker image rm <image>` before running them again to get the latest state.
```
Have the note be a quote, matching style of how those are often done.
